It's July the 7th, and I'm in the Connolly building
and have the pleasure and honor of chatting with
Daniel Hernandez about his Texas A&M student
experiences. Daniel, say a sentence to test your
mic. Hello, I'm here, and I'm glad to be here with
Haskell Munroe. I want to introduce yourself to
someone who may read the transcript or hear the
tape. Describe briefly your family background,
from where, when, and what brought you to this
community, and where to high school, and so forth.
My mom came originally from Mexico City. My dad was
born in Hondo, Texas, and There's a 20 years
difference between a mom and dad. A mom and dad met
each other in Taylor, Texas. My mom's brothers and
dad had come to Texas in the early part of the
century, trying to find their way into a better
situation. And they stayed here for about a year or
two. Then they sent for my mom and her her mother and
sisters, which has been the pattern for many, many
years. And they came, and my dad met them. He was
born in Texas. And by the time my dad met them, my dad
had been married three times. had three children
from his prior marriage, and met my mom in Taylor,
Texas. And then they married and moved to
Wheelock, Texas, which is in Robertson County.
And there my mom and dad were involved in
sharecropping there at the Seal Farm. And they
were there for several years. All along this time,
there was a gentleman by the name of Pablo
Hernandez, who was a friend of my dad's, an older
gentleman, much older than my dad. And he would
always share the gospel with my dad about having a
changed life, a new spiritual life. And my dad said
he would sort of humor him and go with him to the
church functions because they had good cover dish
dinners and suppers and lunches. And so he would do
that on Sundays. And eventually something
happened where it really caught hold of my dad
spiritually, and it really transformed his life.
This is important because this was the pivotal
point that sort of began to make him think
differently about himself and the family. As a
result of this new way of thinking, a new thinking
of himself and the family, and by this time I think
there must have been about four children from my
mom's, that my mom had had with him, and he had his
three other children who by this time were already
adults. And... They were often married, but my dad
decided to ask the owner of the land if he would
drive my sister and drop her off at schoolhouse, my
sister Isabel. And for some reason, the gentleman
said no. Or it couldn't happen, it wouldn't
happen, whatever. And so that really, really
touched my dad. It just changed. He told me later
that it was weird because had it been before he had
had this transformed new life, spiritual
relationship with God, it would have just been one
of those other setbacks. Plus, he said, I probably
wouldn't have even asked him. But he said that
night he went out to the cotton field and just sort
of cried and just said, you know, there's got to be
something better. And so somehow he just felt like
there was a need to move and so on. They, within a
couple of weeks or so, picked up their stuff, made
the decision, and moved to Bryan, 20 miles away.
And so they came to Bryan. And at that time, this is
about in the 30s, late 30s, early 40s, my dad,
having developed a real spiritual reawakening,
he started working. but also started preaching,
having church services at his house. And so he
would have church services and work at the Texas
Highway Department. And just little by little,
and since agriculture was also part of his
background, he began to pay contracts with some of
the local farmers and landowners in the Brazos
Bottom and would contract labor to work in the
fields. And that's what my brothers and I did all
along for the most part of our younger life. My
oldest brother, my oldest two brothers, and my
sister, Isabel, or all my brothers and I finished
high school at Bryan High, which then used to be
Stephen F. Austin in Bryan. The first person in our
family to finish school was my sister, Isabel.
Because there was no no college here or A&M did not
accept women, this was back in the early 50s, she
went to Baldwin-McKinsey College, McKinsey
Baldwin College, a business college here, a year
program or something for secretarial training,
and that's where my sister went. My older
brothers, my older brother Mike, finished high
school probably about 54, sometime around that
time, 56, and he was 21 years old when he finished
high school. My brother Andrew, who finished
about a year later or two years later, was also 21.
And the reason they ended up being 21 when they
finished was because my dad would take them out
from school and they would work the fields. During
this interim, what they would end up doing is they
would work the fields here and also go to Lubbock,
Texas and work. And very sometimes there was a six
months missed or a year missed, but they did miss a
lot of school, so they were older students. And...
My brother Mike was the first one to start Texas
A&M, and I would say that was probably like 1956,
57, and starting the Corps of Cadets. Right, and so
you finished high school what year? I finished
high school in 1969, five brothers later, and I was
the last of ten children, and there were six boys
and four girls. One of my sisters died when she was
like two years old, Um, and, um, so, uh, my brother,
Mike, uh, started going to college, uh, right
after high school. And, um, at first it was a real
struggle for my dad, uh, though he wanted him to go
to educated, but you know, the reality set in that
they were less, there's less time for them to work
with him and work the fields. Fortunately for him,
he had a lot of other sons coming in along the line.
so every two years there was a new child and we were
six boys so uh... fortunately there was one of us
becoming of age to be able to drive or work so that
made it easier but my dad had to find a new
definition of what i guess one would call a man
because in his mind a man was someone who worked
with his hands was sweating was always out in the
fields was and how his sons who he admired a lot,
were now in a clean shirt, no sweat. It was working
and trying to go to college. Even though while they
were going to college, they did work at the
International Shoe Factory here. But it was a
different kind. And I think at first my dad had...
It was tough for him because it was this whole
notion that they were becoming... not that rugged
person that he was accustomed to them being, even
though they had lived through that for most of
their lives. At about what age did you become aware
that college would be expected of you? I would say
when I was probably about eight or nine years old.
And it's interesting because we would still work
in the cotton fields. We would go to migrant
workers. We would go into Lubbock and Brownfield,
Texas, We would leave like in late May, spend all
through August chopping cotton. And my dad would
take the whole family with us. And then we would
come back for about a month. And then late
September, we would go back to the same farm and
then pick the cotton. And I remember when I was
probably about nine years old, I began to sign my
name Daniel Hernandez, class of 73. Now, I
remember the teachers thought of thinking that
funny. But my brothers were going to school. And I
remember telling the teachers in Lockville,
excuse me, I forgot the name of the school
where I went to. But we would tell them, I would tell
them I have brothers that were Aggies. And of
course, it was incongruent because she knew we
were farm workers. But I think one time I came with
an Aggie t-shirt and might have. Right. Now, you
left here before the spring semester was over to go
work. Well, normally we were right after school.
Right after school. All right. Now in the fall,
we'd be picking cotton. Right. And would y'all
just be absent from the Bryan schools? We were
absent from the Bryan schools, and my dad would
enroll us in Lubbock in
the schools, but sometimes... He would keep us
about two or three weeks when we first got there
because he needed us to get him started. And so then
we'd go for about a month, a month and a half, and
then he'd pull us out about two or three weeks
before the semester was over. So we ended up going
to school about six weeks and at the front end,
missing three weeks, at the back end, another
three weeks. And so none of us ever failed. We all
made the grade and made good grades over there and
made good grades here. And my brother, Mike, who
was the first one to go through this whole process
was the one that really just drove it into us. You
got to study. We couldn't. My mom was very, very
faithful to the Bible and would not let us read
funny books. So at home, we could not read funny
books. We either had to be reading the Bible. We
were one of the first to get a television here in
Bryan, and I guess in 1956 we must have gotten the
first TV, but we could not watch TV during the week.
My brother would not let us watch TV during the week
because we had to, and we couldn't read funny
books, so we left the Bible. And so on weekends we
could watch TV. When I became a sophomore in high
school, my older brother then, who was now at home,
because every time one would leave, another
brother would take over. My brother David would
let us watch one hour of TV a night. Now, did those
brothers assume a fatherly role? Were they the
male rule enforcer? My dad was the ultimate
enforcer, but if it ever got to him, It's because
things were pretty bad, and so we never wanted to
have things get to my dad. But the way my dad reared
us was that if your older brother's there, he's in
charge. And so my dad was working a lot, and so that
was the way it was. If my brother that was two years
older than me was there and I was 10 and he's 12, he
was a guy that I had to obey. What might have been the
punishment if you had broken some of those rules?
Uh... Probably a good whacking in the bottom.
Though I'll have to admit, my dad was very lenient
on me, and he kind of did and spanked me. And my other
brothers weren't too crazy about that. But my
brothers were the ones that put the fear in me.
Because my dad may not have spanked me, but my
brother Mike always had a belt around his chair.
And he says, you see this belt right here? Do you
want some of that belt? And of course I'd say no. And
every once in a while I might cry mercy for my dad,
but my brothers were pretty much the ones that were
the disciplinarians. All right, so now you
graduated high school what year? 1969. 69. And do
you remember what part of the year you applied for
admission to A&M? Oh, no, it was probably in the
spring. I was pretty nervous because I was the last
one to have started A&M, and I got admitted. And I
was nervous when I started in September because I
kind of felt a burden on me because I thought, you
know, here all my brothers have gone. By that time,
I think two or three had already graduated, and the
others were still in school. And it was like, are we
going to, you know, am I going to make it? And, of
course, it was more the anxiety of I wanted to make
sure that I did as good as they had. Now, your senior
class at Stephen F. Austin, about how many? 400
students. Okay. And was there a large number of
them going to A&M? You know,
I don't know how many. I know a lot of my classmates
did. Percentage-wise, I couldn't tell you. But
you had a number of acquaintances. Oh, yes, I had a
number of acquaintances. All right. Did you have
one or two close buddies that were going to A&M?
Yeah. I had two or three friends of mine that I had
played ball with, David Scasta and Ronald Spees.
These were guys that I had gone to elementary
school with, junior high and high school, and
pretty bright guys, and they ended up coming to A&M
also. All right. So describe now the routine. of
registering and going to your first classes the
first year? Well, I
remember registering, which was pretty
straightforward. And I remember getting a letter
of admission. And I guess by the time I was going to
school, for me to go to A&M was important, but it was
not one of those things that people jumped up and
down because it was expected of me. I was just doing
the next thing in line. And so, not that it lost its
favor, it was just, it was expected. I guess my
first days of class, I remember not feeling
nervous, but just feeling excited about going to
school. I did see some of my friends in some of my
bigger classes, like history and English. Now,
where was registration held then, Sabisa or G.
Raleigh? Because wasn't this still the time when
you stood in line and went from counter to counter?
You had to go to counter to counter. I don't
remember, quite frankly. You don't remember any
unusual? No. No, it was pretty straightforward.
Now, you lived at home. I lived at home, as my
brothers had before me. Did you encounter any kind
of experiences that first fall about being a
minority student or anything else? No. No, I
didn't. I think because, I mean, I had played
around on campus. I had watched Randy Madsen set
the world record. I rode my bike over here. So I was
like at home. What I think I found that was kind of
unusual is some of the students were not used to
seeing a lot of Hispanics going to school, and I
think for them it was kind of, it was just a
difference. No one ever said negative derogatory
things, but there was a sense of disconnectedness
with some of the students. But as far as a campus, or
feeling a part of the campus, that was something I
always felt a part of the campus, and it was always,
you know, as far as I was concerned, you know, that
was my campus. I'd been there since I was a kid. Did,
now, you have always struck me as being a person I
would call a mainstreamer, that instead of being
on the outside, you've always tried to be on the
inside. Was that deliberate with you? Did you
think about that, or was that just normal? You mean
regarding just the political concepts or ideas
related? Well, that was just part of my family
upbringing. I think having been a part of the
United Methodist Church taught us a lot of
leadership skills. All my brothers and I were
leaders in church conferences, which included
several hundred students and youth. And we were
always doing public speaking. We were always in
the middle, always expected to be in the middle.
And so there was an expectation among the
Hernandez boys and girls to be in the middle and to
participate. So when coming here, I ended up
pursuing some of the same kind of activities. Can
you share any recollections of that first
semester of classes? What did you take? From whom?
Any experiences? Oh, I remember taking a class
from... My freshman math class from, you may have
to help me here, he's at A&M right now as their
assistant provost. Bill Perry? No, the guy who
handles all the fiscal affairs.
I forget his name. He was my math professor in
Algebra 102. And then they threw in all of the
engineers along with all the social science and
liberal liberal arts and of course I was there I was
doing well because I had done well in high school
but I was with a bunch of engineers who could just
eat that math up and that was you know that was the
first time I had really was facing the idea of
making a C in math and it kind of like shocked me
because it wasn't that I didn't understand it it
was just The material was going faster than I'd
been used to because these kids were picking it up a
lot faster. I had my English teacher. I remember
this quite vividly, and I forget her name, but it
was the year that Midnight Cowboy came out. And the
first English paper, my brothers had told me, the
first paper you write, you're going to probably
make an F on it because they're going to write it up,
and you're going to just, like, you don't know how
to write. Well, that's what happened. I mean, I
wrote it. I think I made a D, barely made a D. And then
my teacher talked to me, and so we were supposed to
write a narrative on the movie, a movie we saw or
some book. So I did it on the movie Midnight Cowboy.
And after all the critique that she had given me,
she came back, and I did a, you know, I loved it. The
movie was great, and I came back with an A. And, I
mean, that just gave me the confidence that I
needed, and it made me feel great. And so it really
helped me pick up a lot of my feeling about feeling
good about myself and that I was going to do well in
school. My history professor, Ashcraft.
Alan Ashcraft. Alan Ashcraft, my history
professor. And he was funny. He was joyful. He was a
delight to listen to. And he really made history
come alive. Did he have a nickname? You know how
students gave it, everybody? No. I didn't know of
one if he had one. No, no, no. But he had a very
interesting mannerism about how he talked. He was
a big fella, but he had a very soft way of talking.
And no... But he, of course, in those days, using
the word damn and hell was not very common in public
schools. But when he used it, it just made the
class, the word came in at the right time. You took,
do you remember how many hours you took that first
semester? First semester, I think I took 13 hours.
13. And you did okay in terms of? Yeah. I think I made
like a, I came out with a 2.8, 2.9 maybe. I can't
remember now. You weren't in the Corps. No. Did you
get involved in any Aggie activities that fall?
That fall semester I did not because I was working.
What I would do, I'd have my classes Mondays,
Wednesdays, Fridays in the morning, and then at 2
o'clock in the afternoon I would work at Alinko,
and I would work from 2 to 10 in the evening. And that
was my routine. And then what did you do on Tuesday
and Thursday? Tuesday and Thursday I'd study. Oh,
okay. And I'd go work, but I would study. So you were
working three eight-hour days, three eight-hour
shifts, Monday, Wednesday, Friday? Monday,
Wednesday, Friday, but also I went on Tuesday and
Thursdays to work. Oh, so you worked a full week.
Yes. And one thing I didn't tell you, the reason why
I worked a full week time was because uh my oldest
brother mike when he was like 25 he and andrew
decided to help my parents and they purchased a
home for my parents and the way it worked it was that
the boys and the girls we would all pay for the house
so as we became of age at 18 we would all pick up the
slack so it just worked out beautifully because we
were responsible for paying the mortgage and the
utilities for a house And then, of course,
anything else, if we bought a car, which I decided
to buy a car later, all of that was up on us. So we had
to be working in order to meet the obligation of the
house and utilities, which nowadays is hardly
anything, but in those days it was enough. Do you
remember what your A&M bill was? Do you remember
what a semester cost? Oh, I'm thinking something
like, hmm. Three or four hundred dollars. And you
paid that yourself? Yes. And how did you get to the
campus that first semester? The first semester, I
ended up, my dad had a, oh no, I ended up going with my
brothers. I ended up going with my brothers
because we were going to class, we all had to, my
other brother Moises had to also meet a We worked
together at the same place. So we would set up our
classes. Monday was the Fridays in the morning,
and then we would drive. The year later, the summer
of 1970 is when I bought me my own vehicle, a used
vehicle, and then from there I had my own schedule.
And what advice did those older brothers give you
about being a college student? Well, you know,
it's interesting because advice was just
something that had been given all the time. It's
almost like it was expected and they would ask how
they're going and but my oldest brothers by that
time were married and gone. They were living in
Houston and so at home it was only those of us that
were still in school because every time one of the
brothers was graduated, they would move out. My
oldest sister lived in Bryan. She was married. And
my other sister had moved to California. And my
youngest sister, she worked here on campus, but
later on finished her degree at A&M. So she was the
only sister that finished Texas A&M. But they
didn't tell you about, don't take this course or
use... No, no. It was pretty much... You know, I
guess we didn't talk much about what to expect or
not expect because we pretty much knew that it was
just get in there and do it. All right. What rules
did you know were your rules of conduct and
behavior as a college student because of your
family? Well, I guess I always respected A&M. I
respected the traditions. Those were just, I
mean, I grew up not walking on the grass. I grew up
not putting a cap on. I grew up, you know, singing
the Aggie War Hymn, the Spirit of Aggieland. So all
those things were just a part of me. To me, it was
just like another extension of what it was to be a
person, a human being, an American. And so in that
way, it was quite unique. I think respecting my
elders. I mean, all that was very much an
expectation. We'd see some students who were
perhaps on the fringe of the hippie, but really,
but as hippies they got was that they had long hair,
but it wasn't, I think, to the extreme that you
would see in either campus across the state. All
right, but then in your private life, what were the
rules that you knew you were to follow? Well, I
pretty much had to, this being my home and my
parents being Christian, my parents, I never,
this may sound strange, but drinking was never one
of those things that I had ever aspired to. It was
just not one of those things of smoking or doing
drugs. It was just never one of those things that I
never thought about doing in a serious way. And I
guess what helped a lot was that the people I hung
around with, neither did they. What about what
hours of the night you were to be home? Well, my dad,
once we were 18, pretty much it was really up to us.
But during the day, during the week hours, we were
working, so we'd get home about 10, 10.30, and we
would maybe study a little while and eat and then go
to bed and get up the next day. They would be... My
dad, I hardly ever saw him except on Saturdays and
Sundays because we were... He was in completely
different schedules. So I didn't see him. He would
get up early in the morning and go to work. And then I
was working when he got back. And so my mom was the
one who would give us breakfast and then leave us
something to eat at night. But she was the one that
we would always talk with. All right. That first
fall, you said you went to Yale practice. Did you go
to any silver taps? yes yes with the silver tabs um
what was your impression at your first silver tabs
i guess it was um pretty
i guess i had never seen something like that i i
related that to wow this is some solemn stuff that
we do at church or something that you know what this
is i guess what struck me was it was students who
were who were engaged in this very solemn ritual
that struck me regardless of what you were doing 30
minutes before when it came everybody was quiet in
a meditating kind of mood and I think that's what
began to connect the dots for me about A&M and its
traditions you go through the traditions and you
see them and you hear them as a young kid But when you
begin to see these things all sort of fall in line,
they all make a lot of sense. Did you go to fish camp?
No. I don't even know if they had fish camp in the
19th. Yeah, they did. Because I used to go up there
to speak about what land-grant education was. I
was not one of them. Did you have anything to do with
Bonfire? No, I didn't, because, like I said, I was
working. Did you attend Bonfire? Oh, yes. In fact,
my wife's My first date with my wife was at Aggie
Bonfire. Was it that first year? No, no, no. It was
in 1972. I was a senior. But I never could work at
Bonfire because we were working those hours,
which... Now, wait. I thought you said you
began... When did you enroll at AM? 69. 69. Oh,
okay. Yeah. All right. Well, let's jump forward to
that. You mentioned that date. Describe that.
that bonfire with that date? Oh, well, I was, I
guess I was trying to impress her that I was a
student and she was impressed, I guess. And we went
to the bonfire and she had never been to anything
like that. She was from up in Lubbock. And, um, She
had gone to West Texas State University, so there
was nothing like that at West Texas State. And this
was a big deal. And I think for her, being in a place
where there were mainly whites, all whites, and
for us to participate in the school life and
participate in what was going on was very
different because that was not what she was
accustomed to.